   Copyright (C) 1990, 1995, 1996, 1997 Aladdin Enterprises.  All rights reserved.
  
  This file is part of Aladdin Ghostscript.
  
  Aladdin Ghostscript is distributed with NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND.  No author
  or distributor accepts any responsibility for the consequences of using it,
  or for whether it serves any particular purpose or works at all, unless he
  or she says so in writing.  Refer to the Aladdin Ghostscript Free Public
  License (the "License") for full details.
  
  Every copy of Aladdin Ghostscript must include a copy of the License,
  normally in a plain ASCII text file named PUBLIC.  The License grants you
  the right to copy, modify and redistribute Aladdin Ghostscript, but only
  under certain conditions described in the License.  Among other things, the
  License requires that the copyright notice and this notice be preserved on
  all copies.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

This file, psfiles.txt, describes the .ps files distributed with
Ghostscript, other than fonts.

For an overview of Ghostscript and a list of the documentation files, see
README.

Generally used system files
---------------------------

gs_init.ps - Ghostscript reads this automatically when it starts up.  It
contains definitions of many standard procedures and initialization for a
wide variety of things.

gs_btokn.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in if the btoken feature is included in
the configuration.  It provides support for binary tokens.

gs_ccfnt.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in if the ccfonts feature is included
in the configuration.  It provides support for compiled fonts.

gs_fonts.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in.  It initializes Ghostscript's font
machinery and provides some utility procedures that work with fonts.

gs_statd.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in.  It creates a dummy statusdict and
some other environmental odds and ends for the benefit of PostScript files
that really want to be printed on a LaserWriter.

gs_dps1.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in if the dps feature is included in
the configuration.  It provides support for various Display PostScript and
Level 2 features.

gs_lev2.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in if the Ghostscript interpreter
includes Level 2 PostScript functions.  It contains definitions of
procedures and miscellaneous initialization for the Level 2 functions.

gs_res.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in if the Level 2 resource machinery is
included.  Currently, this is the case for all Level 2 configurations.

gs_type1.ps - gs_init.ps reads this in if the Ghostscript interpreter
includes Type 1 font capability (which it normally does).

gs_*_e.ps - These files define the Encodings known to Ghostscript.  All of
them except gs_std_e.ps and gs_iso_e.ps are loaded only if referenced.

More obscure system files
-------------------------

gs_cmdl.ps - This file is not used yet.  Eventually it will replace C code
that parses the Ghostscript command line.

gs_diskf.ps - This file implements the -dDISKFONTS feature (diskfont.dev).
See use.txt for a description of this feature.

gs_kanji.ps - This file provides support for the Wadalab free Kanji font.
It is not included automatically in any configuration.

gs_pdfwr.ps - This file contains some patches for providing information to
the pdfwrite driver.  It is included only if the pdfwrite driver is
included.

gs_pfile.ps - This file provides runtime support for packed fonts.  It is
not included automatically in any configuration.

PDF-specific system files
-------------------------

gs_pdf.ps - The ProcSet that provides runtime support for PDF files.
pdf2ps copies this into its output.

gs_l2img.ps - The ProcSet that emulates the PostScript Level 2 'image'
operator on Level 1 systems.  pdf2ps copies this into its output if the
PSLevel1 option was selected.

pdf_2ps.ps - The additions to the PDF interpreter that allow it to convert
PDF to PostScript.

pdf_base.ps - Utilities for interpreting PDF objects and streams.

pdf_draw.ps - The interpreter for drawing-related PDF operations.

pdf_font.ps - Code for handling fonts in PDF files.

pdf_main.ps - Document- and page-level control for interpreting PDF files.

Art
---

chess.ps - A black-and-white chessboard.

golfer.ps - A gray-scale picture of a stylishly dressed woman swinging a
golf club.

escher.ps - A colored version of a hexagonally symmetric Escher drawing of
interlocking butterflies.  Can be printed on monochrome devices, with
somewhat less dramatic results.

cheq.ps - A chessboard "font" used by chess.ps (obtained from the Adobe
file server).

snowflak.ps - A rectangular grid of intricate colored snowflakes.
(Renders very slowly.)

colorcir.ps - A set of nested ellipses made up of colored bars.

tiger.ps - A dramatic colored picture of a tiger's head.

ridt.eps - The RIDT '91 logo.  Note that since this is an EPS file, you will
have to add
	-c showpage
at the end of the command line to print it or convert it to a raster file.

Utilities
---------

For more information on these utility programs, see the comments at the
beginning of the files.  The ones marked with * have batch files or shell
scripts of the same name (e.g., bdftops, bdftops.bat) to invoke them
conveniently.

align.ps - a test page for determining the proper margin and offset
parameters for your printer.

bench.ps - a file useful for running benchmarks.

* bdftops.ps - a utility for converting BDF fonts to outline form: see
fonts.txt for more information.

caption.ps - a file for putting a caption in a box at the bottom of each
page, useful for trade show demos.

docie.ps - an emulation of the CIE color mapping algorithms.

* gslp.ps - a utility for doing "line printing" of plain text files.

impath.ps - a utility for reconstructing outlines from bitmap images,
used by bdftops.

landscap.ps - a file that you can put in front of your own files to get
them rendered in landscape mode.

level1.ps - a file that turns off any Level 2 features.

packfile.ps - a utility for compressing fonts into a single file.

prfont.ps - a utility to print a font catalog.

* ps2ascii.ps - a utility for extracting the ASCII text from PostScript
source files.  It redefines many operators.  For more information, see the
comments in the file.

ps2ai.ps - a utility for converting an arbitrary PostScript file into a form
compatible with Adobe Illustrator.  NOTE: ps2ai doesn't work properly with
Adobe's Helvetica-Oblique font, and other fonts whose original FontMatrix
involves skewing or rotation.

* ps2epsi.ps - a utility for converting an arbitrary PostScript file into
EPSI form.

quit.ps - a file containing just the word "quit".  (The -c switch now makes
this unnecessary; this file exists for backward compatibility.)

rollconv.ps - a utility for converting files produced by Macromedia's Rollup
program to a Type 0 form directly usable by Ghostscript.

showpage.ps - a file containing just the word "showpage".  (The -c switch
now makes this unnecessary; this file exists for backward compatibility.)

viewcmyk.ps - a utility for displaying CMYK files.

viewgif.ps - a utility for displaying GIF files.

viewjpeg.ps - a utility for displaying JPEG files.

viewpcx.ps - a utility for displaying PCX files.

viewpbm.ps - a utility for displaying PBM/PGM/PPM files.

waterfal.ps - a utility to print a "waterfall" of fonts at different
sizes.

Development tools
-----------------

acctest.ps - a utility that checks whether the interpreter enforces access
restrictions.

decrypt.ps - a utility for decrypting the eexec section of a font.

markpath.ps - a utility for showing the points on a path.

pcharstr.ps - a utility for printing out the CharStrings and Subrs in a
Type 1 font.

ppath.ps - a couple of utilities for printing out the current path, for
debugging.

traceop.ps - a utility for tracing uses of any procedure or operator
for debugging.

type1enc.ps - the Type 1 font format encryption and decryption algorithms,
written in PostScript.

uninfo.ps - some utilities for printing out PostScript data structures.

unprot.ps - a prologue to disable access checking.

viewps2a.ps - a utility for displaying the output of ps2ascii.ps.

winmaps.ps - a utility for creating mappings between the Adobe encodings
and the Microsoft Windows character sets.

wrfont.ps - a utility for writing out an unprotected Type 1 font, such as
the standard Ghostscript fonts.

zeroline.ps - a utility for testing how interpreters handle zero-width
lines.

Odds and ends
-------------

lines.ps - a test program for line joins and caps.

type1ops.ps - the Type 1 font format opcodes.
